Period life expectancy is the average number of years a person would expect to live based on contemporary mortality rates. For a particular area and time period, it is an estimate of the average number of years a new-born baby would survive if he or she experienced the age-specific mortality rates for that area and time period throughout his or her life.
Figures reflect mortality among those living in an area in each time period, rather than mortality among those born in the area. The figures are not therefore the number of years a baby born in the area could actually expect to live, both because the mortality rates of the area are likely to change in the future and because many of those born in the area will live elsewhere for at least some part of their lives.
Life expectancy at birth is a useful summary measure of all-cause mortality as it quantifies the differences between areas in units (years of life) that are more readily understood and meaningful to the audience than those of other measures.
All cause mortality is a fundamental and probably the oldest measure of the health status of a population.It represents the cumulative effect of the prevalence of risk factors, prevalence and severity of disease, and the effectiveness of interventions and treatment. Differences in levels of all-cause mortality reflect health inequalities between different population groups, e.g. between genders, social classes and ethnic groups.

Methodology: Life expectancy calculations were based on abridged life table approach. Mortality data by sex and age group were extracted from annual files supplied to PHE by the Office for National Statistics (ONS).
Deaths were allocated to the deceased's middle super output area (MSOA), lower super output area (LSOA) and output area (OA) of usual residence using the latest version of the National Statistics Postcode Lookup and aggregated to wards and Clinical Commissioning Groups.
Deaths were allocated to local authorities and counties based on the ONS geography provided in the death dataset. Population data are mid-year population estimates for MSOAs, LSOAs, and OAs, by sex and single year of age, available from the ONS. Counts by single year of age were aggregated into the age groups required for the calculation of life expectancy (less than 1, 1 to 4, 5 to 9,10 to 14, through to 80 to 84, 90 and over).
The upper age band used for the calculation of life expectancy in this dataset is 90+. OA deaths and population estimates were aggregated to wards and LSOA deaths and population estimates were aggregated to MSOAs and CCGs using standard geographical lookup tables obtained from ONS Geography.
Confidence intervals: 95 percent confidence intervals were calculated using the method developed by Chiang, which was adjusted according to the method described by Silcocks to account for the variance in the upper age band. Chiang CL. The Life Table and its Construction. Introduction to Stochastic Processes in Biostatistics. New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1968, 189-214. Silcocks PBS, Jenner DA, Reza R. Life expectancy as a summary of mortality in a population: statistical considerations and suitability for use by health authorities. J Epidemiology Community Health 2001; 55: 38-43
Data suppression for data quality purposes: Life expectancy values have not been presented for areas where:-
The person-years in any given age interval is zero
The population is less than 5,000
There are no deaths in the 90+ age group
The number of deaths in an age group is greater than the population estimate for that age group
The confidence interval around the life expectancy value is greater than 20 years
Notes: Life expectancy figures (5-year pooled data) were calculated using an abridged life table with an upper age band of 90+. Using an upper age band of 90+ is consistent with sub-national life expectancy figures published by ONS, and included in the Public Health Outcomes Framework. This change was made because an increasing proportion of deaths are at ages 85 and over. In some areas, the majority of deaths at age 85 and over may be in the 85-89 age band, while in other areas a large proportion of deaths may be after age 90. Splitting deaths at the oldest ages into two groups (85-89 and 90+) means that the latest life expectancy calculations now take account of such differences in the age structure of populations between areas. The accuracy of the life expectancy estimates is thus improved

Limitations: Copyright: Crown copyright
Reproduction of information is subject to the terms of the Open Government Licence and the UK Government Licensing Framework.

Accuracy of data: Values with a confidence interval